The Project Gutenberg eBook of Horæ Nauseæ, by Lawrence Peel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Horæ Nauseæ

Author: Lawrence Peel

Release Date: September 14, 2021 [eBook #66301]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Mark C. Orton and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HORÆ NAUSEÆ ***





                              HORÆ NAUSEÆ.

                                   BY
                             LAWRENCE PEEL.

                                 LONDON:
               PRINTED BY BRADBURY AND EVANS, WHITEFRIARS.
                                MDCCCXLI.




CONTENTS.


                                                             PAGE

                 TRANSLATIONS FROM THE SPANISH.

    GIL POLO                                                    3

    QUEVEDO                                                     5

    QUEVEDO                                                     7

    ARGENSOLA                                                   9

    ON THE PROOFS OF A DEITY (_Original_)                      11

    VILLEGAS                                                   13

    MELENDEZ                                                   17

    MELENDEZ                                                   21

    A FABLE                                                    25

                   TRANSLATIONS FROM HORACE.

    BOOK I.—ODE III.                                           35

    BOOK I.—ODE V.                                             41

    BOOK I.—ODE IX.                                            43

    BOOK III.—ODE XXIX.                                        47

                        ORIGINAL PIECES.

    ODE TO HARRIS                                              59

    THE DOCTOR WITHOUT A SOUL; OR, THE CREATURES OF ROMANCE    63

    A MATRIMONIAL DIALOGUE AND MARINE ECLOGUE                  73

    THE PILOT IN SIGHT                                         83

    THE ARRIVAL; OR, THE LAND-LUBBER’S SONG                    87




TRANSLATIONS FROM THE SPANISH.




GIL POLO.


    Love is not blind, but I alone, who steer
    My wishes headlong unto death:
    Love is no child, but I; who in a breath
    Laugh and lament, and hope and fear:
    What folly then to speak of “flames of Love!”
    Love’s fire from untamed passion springs,
    High and presumptuous thoughts are Cupid’s wings,
    Or hopes as vain on which he soars above.
    Love has no chains, Love bears no bow
    To take, or strike the sound, and free:
    No power has he save that which we bestow;
    A poet’s fiction gave him birth,
    The dream of fools, adored on earth
    By none except the sons of vanity.




QUEVEDO.


    No more shall custom dash my coward heart,
    Nor shadowy forms nor gloomy fears o’erpower
    My soul, that waits the cold, dark, final hour:
    Soul! be thyself, arm, courage is thy part.
    If Death, though clad in sorrow’s sable weeds,
    Bring peace, a stranger to my troubled breast,
    I’ll give him welcome so he give me rest,
    And thank him as his brandish’d dart he speeds.
    Forgive me that I harbour’d childish fears
    Of thee, the struggling soul who comest to aid,
    As now the disentangled mesh it clears,
    Mortality’s frail snare: no more afraid
    I welcome thee with smiles, not greet with tears,
    For well I know my Ransom hath been paid.




QUEVEDO.


    I saw, its lofty ramparts undermined,
    Crumbling to earth, my native town decay;
    I saw my fathers’ house, nor saw resign’d,
    Alike assail’d Time’s not disdained prey:
    Upon its black and Time-dishonour’d wall
    My sword ancestral eager I survey’d;
    Devouring Time, triumphant over all,
    Had eaten into its corroded blade:
    My shorten’d staff still yielded as I prest
    The prop on which my age must yet rely,
    And all on which my hand or eye could rest
    Gave sad and solemn warning that we die.




ARGENSOLA.


    Father of all! unfold, since thou art just,
    Why does thy providence all coldly see
    Pale innocence enchain’d that would be free,
    Whilst fraud ascends the judgment-seat august.
    Who nerves the arm of power which dares oppose
    An impious resistance to thy will?
    Shall holy zeal and timid reverence still
    Groan at the feet of thy obdurate foes?
    See! impious hands victorious banners wave!
    Hark! virtue moans scarce heard amid the shout
    Of insolent triumph, and its boisterous mirth!
    Thus I complaining spoke: A form shone out,
    Gravely it spoke: “Is thy soul’s centre earth?
    Oh blind one! not to _see beyond_ the grave!”




ON THE PROOFS OF A DEITY.

ORIGINAL.


    Talk not of proofs: God must be seen, and felt,
    And known by meditation; not deduced
    Like some hard problem, or a riddle spelt
    By frequent guessing. Proofs on proofs adduced,
    Speak they so plainly as the wailing cry
    Of her first infant tells the mother’s heart
    A mother’s love doth well from God on high?
    Who hath not heard, in solitude apart,
    God’s voice upon the wind? Who hath not seen
    And felt Him present? seen Him earth pervade?
    Each spring, their wither’d crowns renew with green
    In aged trees? seen Him in depths of shade?
    And glorious sunshine? and reveal’d in light
    Of stars? and in the sea’s resistless might?




VILLEGAS.


    I.

    Now, Spring the year’s contracted brow
    Unknits, and robes in brightest green
    The trees; and, victims to the plough,
    Fresh flowers are strew’d where snows were seen.
    The honours of the time complete,
    Come forth, and welcome in the spring,
    Which spreads a carpet for thy feet,
    A verdant broider’d offering
    For thee, whom, honour’d as her queen,
    She mourns away, and welcomes seen.

    II.

    Here in this flowing mirror see,
    Worthy of thy reflected face,
    Exulting in its waters free,
    Charms which art’s rivalry disgrace.
    The bygone waters would return,
    The waters present stay their course;
    The coming waters from their urn
    A passage prematurely force;
    All jealous, striving to possess
    The image of thy loveliness.

    III.

    Nature is eloquent to teach:
    Her lessons do not thou disdain:
    The birds, though unendow’d with speech,
    Can carol love, in song complain.
    Come, seek their school: their love-taught notes
    The text of nature will expound;
    The thrilling music of their throats
    Teach us what bliss in love is found;
    And all their pretty wanton ways,
    Mutely reprove our dull delays.




MELENDEZ.

CUPID A BUTTERFLY.


    Observing once, with secret spite,
    The rustic maidens, wild with fright,
    Fly from him when his arms he bore,
    Revenge the wily Cupid swore;
    And straight a stratagem design’d,
    For Cupid’s malice is refined.
    He seems a butterfly complete,
    With down upon his baby feet;
    His little arms are changed to wings;
    And sportive into air he springs.
    Now through the meadows he meanders,
    And now from flower to flower he wanders;
    Hovers o’er this, on that alights,
    Whose honied cup his lip invites.
    The maidens think him what he seems,
    Not one of aught deceptive dreams,
    And eager in the chase they strive:
    One stoops to take him up alive,
    As on the ground fatigue he feigns;
    Again he flies and mocks her pains;
    A second calls with accents kind;
    Another panting lags behind.
    He sees them in the contest warm,
    Then starts into his proper form,
    And sets their simple hearts on fire,
    To gratify his childish ire.
    But from that time, in love we see
    The butterfly’s inconstancy.
    Love tarries not, but onward springs;
    Alas! the urchin kept his wings.




MELENDEZ.


    I.

    When I was yet a little boy,
      And Dorila as young,
    Forth to the fields we went with joy,
      Where the first violets sprung.

    II.

    Her hands arranged, with natural grace,
      For each a garland gay;
    And thus, midst childish sports, apace
      The moments danced away.

    III.

    Our age advanced, as they withdrew,
      Unwatch’d by us the while;
    By slow degrees our knowledge grew,
      Till innocence seem’d guile.

    IV.

    The sight of me would now provoke
      A smile, I scarce knew why,
    From Dorila; and if I spoke,
      A laugh was the reply.

    V.

    The flowers I pluck’d she swiftly twined,
      Her own had little care;
    It took her twice as long to bind
      My chaplet in my hair.

    VI.

    One summer’s eve two doves we spied;
      Their trembling bills were cross’d;
    Then first we knew for what we sigh’d:
      The lesson was not lost.




A FABLE.

ALTERED FROM THE SPANISH OF YRIARTE.


    A Piedmontese, from fair to fair,
    Display’d a Vestris in a bear;
    An ape likewise, whose tricks self-taught
    The grinning crowd’s approval caught,
    (Judgment as that of critics sound,
    Who think all’s wit where mischief’s found):
    And last it was his luck to own,
    A treasure in itself alone;
    A pig, to letters train’d, polite
    Of course, the beast was erudite.
    With open mouth, each wondering lout
    Would view its orthographic snout
    Choose letters, and hard words compose,
    Without the due didactic blows.
    Then, if some rude unletter’d hind,
    Impell’d by generous shame, repined,
    Felt his own ignorance, and thought
    That letters might, though late, be taught;
    How would the burly shaven priest
    Exorcise the sleek, learned beast;
    Judge it possess’d, a hog of hell,
    Whose devil-directed nose could spell,
    Pointing to knowledge, and to sin;
    Whilst secretly he’d grieve within
    O’er spelling true, ah! not his own!
    And think the pig, their rival grown,
    Might shake their intellectual throne;
    And force his convent, fond of rule,
    Once more to put themselves to school!
    The bear, first favourite no more,
    Surly, as though his ears were sore,
    The fickle public to regain,
    And give the “pas” to dance again,
    Tries and retries his steps with care,
    Since to be perfect’s not in bear.
    The pig and ape, spectators mute,
    Observe the labours of the brute
    Shuffling, and struggling hard for ease,
    And ever labouring to please.
    At length Sir Bruin thinks he spies
    Derision in pig’s watchful eyes;
    And criticism seems to sneak
    In that dry tongue-distended cheek.
    “Good! Eh?” he daring asks; “my style
    Is all my own, it’s new.” “It’s vile,”
    The Ape cries, midst the Hog’s dissent,
    Who finds the dancing excellent;
    Praises the grace of hams and paws,
    Applauded, (he could spare applause,)
    So natural! and owns that pigs
    Shine less in minuets and jigs;
    And even the critic he defies
    To equal that which he decries.
    Then Bruin, with a thoughtful air,
    Cries, “Friend, your panegyric spare;
    A censuring Ape I might distrust,
    His blame’s too general to be just;
    But, oh! preserve me from my friends!
    I must dance ill—a Hog commends.”




TRANSLATIONS FROM HORACE.




BOOK I.—ODE III.


    I.

    Thee, may the Cyprian queen divine,
    And Helen’s brethren, glittering sign,
    And Æolus, the winds’ stern sire,
    (Save Iapyx all his subjects bound,)
    Ship! prosperous guide; that safe ashore
    Our Virgil, to the Attic ground
    Thou mayst, thy trusted freight, give o’er,
    And save one half my soul entire.

    II.

    His bosom fenced brass triply stout,
    Who first in fragile bark put out,
    Braving the ocean; undeterr’d
    By south-west winds, in contest dire
    With north-east blasts; sad Hyades,
    Or by the south wind’s fiercer ire,
    Lord o’er the Adriatic seas
    Calm’d at its sovereign will, or stirr’d.

    III.

    What shapes of death could him affright,
    Who view’d those ill-famed summits, hight
    Acroceraunia, and the swell
    And swimming monsters of the main
    With steadfast eye? God’s wise decree
    Disjoins the lands remote in vain,
    If impious, o’er the severing sea
    The bark contemptuous sails propel.

    IV.

    Man, bold to endure where gain’s the cause,
    Bursts through divine and human laws.
    When bold Prometheus, for our race,
    Plunder’d of fire the mansions blest
    By wicked fraud, o’er earth new bands
    Of fevers brooded; forward prest
    The pestilence, and new commands
    Quicken’d death’s first retarded pace.

    V.

    On pinions, unto man denied,
    Once Dædalus void æther tried.
    By force hell’s bounds Alcides past.
    Nought is too arduous for man:
    We foolish, heaven itself invade,
    Our desperate crimes fresh outbreaks plan;
    And force Jove’s hand, by mercy stay’d,
    The angry bolts to launch at last.




BOOK I.—ODE V.


    What slender youth, whom many roses crown,
    Whose hair rich liquid unguents steal adown,
    Wooes thee, coy Pyrrha, in some pleasant grot?
    For whom dost thou thy golden tresses knot
    Neat in thine elegance? How oft he’ll weep
    Thy faith and gods as mutable! The deep
    How oft, poor simple novice, he’ll admire
    Blackening beneath the savage tempest’s ire,
    Who now enjoys thee in thy golden days,
    Unconscious how the changing wind betrays;
    Ah, credulous! and fondly hopes to find
    Thee his for ever, and for ever kind.
    Woe unto whom thou glitterest untried!
    My votive picture, in his temple, tells
    I’ve hung my garments, reeking from the tide,
    Before the God, whose power the ocean quells.




BOOK I.—ODE IX.


    I.

    How white Soracte stands, behold,
    With lofty snows! Its labouring trees
    Groan ’neath the weight. The rivers freeze
    And flow no more, congeal’d by cold.

    II.

    Replenish largely from your store
    The fire with logs, dispel the chill;
    And wine, the cherish’d four-year old,
    From Sabine cask more freely fill.

    III.

    Leave to the gods the rest: whose word,
    Soon as it lulls the boiling seas
    Battling with winds, the cypress trees,
    And aged elms, no more are stirr’d.

    IV.

    Ask not, to-morrow what may chance,
    Count it for gain whate’er betide:
    Nor spurn, to peevish age denied,
    Soft loves, my boy, nor yet the dance:

    V.

    Whilst hoary age, morose and sour,
    Spares thy green spring, youth’s pastimes light
    By day, soft whisperings by night,
    Be thine, at the appointed hour,

    VI.

    The hiding maid’s forced laugh, dear sound,
    From secret nook, love’s fond alarm;
    The pledge, which beauty’s plunder’d arm,
    On irretentive finger bound.




BOOK III.—ODE XXIX.


    I.

    Sprung from the Etrurian kingly line
    Mecænas, thee my choicest wine
    Stored in a cask ne’er broach’d, my best
    Of unguents for thy hair exprest,
    With roses fresh, invite to stay;
    Come, snatch thyself from dull delay.
    View not for aye moist Tibur’s glade,
    With Æsula’s inclining side,
    And rocks where erst his refuge made
    Telegonus, the parricide.

    II.

    Leave loathed plenty, and retire
    From piles which to the clouds aspire;
    Leave wealthy Rome for humbler joys,
    Its smoke, its riches, and its noise.
    Vicissitudes delight the great
    Well pleased sometimes to quit their state:
    Beneath the poor man’s humble roof,
    A frugal supper neatly dress’d
    Oft smooths the brow, keeps care aloof,
    Though there no purple couch be prest.

    III.

    Above, Andromeda’s fierce sire
    Glows in the skies with splendid fire;
    Now Procyon rages, and the star
    Of the mad Lion seen afar;
    The sun brings back the time of drought,
    The wearied hind his flocks hath brought
    Languid with heat to shade and stream
    There; where secure in tangled brake
    The rough Sylvanus shuns day’s gleam,
    And winds the silent bank forsake.

    IV.

    Thy task it is to guide the state,
    Solicitous the city’s fate
    To learn, what eastern hordes design,
    What Bactra, ruled by Cyrus’ line,
    Or China; or why discord reigns
    Where Tanais flows through sandy plains.
    God knows, alone, what is to be,
    Prudent, the future veils in night,
    And laughs when ills blind mortals see
    Foreboded, with extreme affright.

    V.

    Use what the present moment brings;
    Like to some stream are future things,
    Which in mid channel calmly glides,
    To mix in the Etrurian tides:
    Anon, adown its waters borne
    Trees, cattle, houses, stones half worn
    Together roll, whilst loud is heard
    The clamour in the mountain caves
    Of neighbouring woods; and tempest-stirr’d,
    The calmest rivers swell with waves.

    VI.

    That man is blest who thus can say
    Lord of himself, “I’ve lived to day;
    To-morrow let the gods obscure
    The sky with clouds, or sunshine pure
    Pour forth, come brightness, or come gloom,
    The past is acted, and its doom
    Pronounced; and to revoke the past,
    Annul the joys I _have_ possess’d,
    Darken the light past hours have cast,
    Is not in fate: I have been blest.”

    VII.

    Fortune still plies her savage trade,
    Laughs at the bankrupts she hath made;
    And insolent enjoys the game
    As shuffling honours, wealth, and fame,
    To others, now to me, she’ll deal
    The prizes of her fickle wheel.
    Mine she’s adored: her gifts resign’d
    Soon as her rapid pinions sound,
    Meek dow’rless poverty, more kind,
    I woo, whilst virtue wraps me round.

    VIII.

    ’Tis not for me, when, strain’d and weak,
    The labouring mast is heard to creak,
    To fall to wretched trading prayers,
    Lest Cyprian or lest Tyrian wares
    With rarest spoils, unwonted gain,
    Enrich the avaricious main.
    Me favour’d by a gentle breeze,
    And safe within my light bireme,
    Shall light along the Ægean seas
    Leda’s fair twins, my constant theme.




ORIGINAL PIECES.




ODE TO HARRIS[1].


    Always I hated civic[2] entertainments:
    Mutton disgusts me simulating[3] ven’son,
    Catch[4] me no fish hermetically fasten’d,
              Harris, or oysters.

    _Still_[5] I could feast on watery[6] potatoes.
    Fill my friend’s lap[7] soups derelict[8], abandon’d
    Sauces, rich gifts of charitable ocean
                Cheaply benignant[9].

[1] Who this Harris was, is a point about which the commentators are at
variance. Some say, but erroneously as I think, that he was the “puer,”
the “minister,” of the poet. But this is not probable, for to such
persons odes were not then commonly addressed. No! Harris was no servant,
he was the friend, the “commensalis,” the fellow-messman of the author at
the cuddy table; whom he may be supposed to be inviting to the erratic
fish, which, under the influence of a gale, has become as locomotive as
ever it was in its own native element.

[2] Why civic, since the entertainment was nautical? ask some
matter-of-fact critics. Do not these blunderers perceive the
delicately-veiled compliment to the owners of the vessel upon the
richness and profusion of the viands?

[3] “Simulating ven’son.” This process is, unfortunately, in some degree
lost to us. Some say that mutton was made to resemble venison, by being
roasted with the wool on. Others, that it was the flesh of a seven-year
old male, _not a wether_. But neither of these conjectures is correct.
The meat was probably steeped in a brine compounded of wine, salt,
spices, sugar, and other condiments, and sprinkled with Irish blackguard
and brickdust.

[4] “Catch.” Some critics would substitute “reach” for “catch.” But who
does not see the witty allusion to the unsteadiness of the table, to
which these dull dogs are blind?

[5] “Still.” Free from motion.

[6] “Watery potatoes.” This expression is very enigmatical. Some
understand by it “dressed in, or by means of water,” as potatoes boiled
or steamed, in opposition to roasted, baked, or fried potatoes, his
preference for which the author is supposed to insinuate. But in my
opinion this reading, though ingenious, is not correct; the true sense
of the expression is potatoes carried by water, that is, potatoes eaten
at sea. Murphyius, however, that intemperate though erudite Hibernian
critic, declares that it means any potato not Irish, which last alone, as
he says, were free when dressed from superfluous moisture. He contends,
that the potato esteemed by epicures was a mealy potato. But he offers
nothing in proof of his assertion.

[7] “Lap.” This is plainly a misreading for “plate.” It would have been
an unfriendly and unamiable wish had the author prayed that liquids,
as soups and sauces were, should fall into the lap of his friend, of
which it would naturally have been irretentive. It is easy to trace the
corruption of the text. “Plate” has been written with an elision, “pla,”
by a copyist studious of his ease. The now final vowel has slipped into
the middle place and formed “pal;” which a careless scribe, putting the
cart before the horse, has changed into “lap.”

[8] “Derelict.” This implies the departure from the table of some
squeamish person without the “animus revertendi.”

[9] “Cheaply benignant,” that is, dispensing things not its own, liberal
at the expense of others; as a generous churchwarden, a chairman
distributing prizes, a prime minister filling up a pension-list, a House
of Commons voting supplies, or an attorney marking undelivered briefs for
a son.




THE DOCTOR WITHOUT A SOUL; OR, THE CREATURES OF ROMANCE.


    I.

    His studies o’er, his next discourse
      Impromptu learnt by rote,
    The rector rose, and doff’d a coarse
      To don a finer coat.

    II.

    His silken hose with shining clocks
      Which clothed each portly calf,
    His shovel hat right orthodox,
      And golden-headed staff,

    III.

    All spoke the doctor. On he strode:
      Soon splash’d, he vow’d irate,
    The sinner who survey’d the road
      He’d excommunicate.

    IV.

    No! he’d indict his stubborn flock,
      And shear their golden fleece.
    Who, heeding _much_ the parish stock,
      _Little_ Victoria’s peace,

    V.

    Rebellious lieges! mended not
      The errors of their ways,
    (Upon their pastor’s shoes a spot
      Would shorten not their days!)

    VI.

    Thus he resolved; but cries invade
      His Reverence’s ear!
    Is it some damsel, who, afraid,
      Sees men disguised in beer?

    VII.

    Or one the milky mothers meet
      Emerging from the byre?
    Who sees a snake beneath her feet?
      Or waddling toad retire?

    VIII.

    Perplex’d, he hurries on the while,
      But soon is seen to stand
    Amazed: two ladies on a stile
      Were seated hand in hand:

    IX.

    Young were they both, and fair to view,
      Yet sorrow from their eyes
    Tears, so the doctor fancied, drew:
      He spoke, in grave surprise:

    X.

    “Issued those cries from ladies’ throats?
      And what’s the reason? say.”
    “How canst thou ask, when all denotes
      The cause? this glorious day!”

    XI.

    “Thank God,” he cried, “the day is fine,
      Yet why should that distress?
    The glass is rising; to repine
      Seems rude unthankfulness.”

    XII.

    “We are not understood, we see
      With optics not like thine,
    What canst thou know of poesy,
      A middle-aged divine?

    XIII.

    “Was ever yet a poet known
      To wear a white cravat?
    A soul did ever mortal own
      In a three-corner’d hat?

    XIV.

    “We could sit here and cry for hours,
      Or shriek with sad delight;
    The earth, sea, sky, sun, shade, and flowers,
      Are agonising quite.

    XV.

    “To weep’s enjoyment half divine:
      Unsavoury appears
    To thee, a bibber of port wine,
      The luxury of tears.

    XVI.

    “Farewell, farewell! we grieve for thee;”
      (They cast a pitying glance,)
    Doctor, thou hast no sympathy
      With Creatures of Romance.”




A MATRIMONIAL DIALOGUE AND MARINE ECLOGUE.


    MR. ADIPOCIRE, an eminent and _reflecting_ Tallow Chandler.
    MRS. ADIPOCIRE, an every-day sort of Woman.

TIME—_Evening. The Sea-shore._

    MR. A.

    How harden’d is the man who has not felt
    His heart ’neath Nature’s influences _melt_!

    MRS. A.

    You promised all these terms of art to drop;
    Indeed, my dear, you savour of the shop.

    MR. A.

    ’Tis sweet to see the lazy clouds decamp,
    ’Tis sweet to see Night hang her silver _lamp_.

    MRS. A.

    Lamp!

    MR. A.

          And with telescope, or naked eye,
    To view the lesser _tapers_ of the sky.

    MRS. A.

    Tapers, for shame!

    MR. A.

                      ’Tis pleasing to discern
    Planet from star, and know the orbs which _burn_.

    MRS. A.

    Burn! there again.

    MR. A.

                      Ah! wherefore do they _blaze_?
    Who _lights_ the sunbeams, and the lunar rays?

    MRS. A.

    Oh!

    MR. A.

        When, as our immortal Shakespear sings,
    “Night’s _candles_ are burnt out,” who daylight brings?

    MRS. A.

    Ah!

    MR. A.

        He whose steady eye to his _concerns_
    Forces the comets to make due _returns_.

    MRS. A.

    I’m quite worn out.

    MR. A.

                      Who bounteous made the whales
    Common and Spermaceti?

    MRS. A.

                            Odious tales!

    MR. A.

    ’Twas that First Cause which, for our nightly use,
    Filleth the cocoa-nuts with unctuous juice,
    Which bids the wether fatten to supply
    A light to tantalise, not satisfy:
    Which gives us fatty wax from bodies dead
    Of Lamberts damp within their “narrow bed,”
    Which stores the laden thighs of bees with wax,
    (Its lustre hence no dining-table lacks
    By footmen rubb’d, who burnish and blaspheme.)
    Wax which illumes when urns emit their steam:
    Wax which inspired the genius of Argand,
    When lamps, despised till then, at his command
    A radiance mild o’er dinner-tables shed,
    Soft’ning on cheeks the artificial red.
    Paling each pimply nose with chasten’d light:

    MRS. A.

    A—! you are quite incorrigible, quite;
    When shall I ever tutor you to feel
    The moral fitness of the “true genteel!”

    MR. A.

    Well, well, I’ll not offend, love, with my tongue.
    Oh! with what art those _lustres_ bright are _hung_!

    MRS. A.

    You keep indeed a guard upon your lips.

    MR. A.

    Observe that bird, how prettily it _dips_;
    Its plumage and its graceful shape behold,
    And see how Nature works in Beauty’s _mould_.

    MRS. A.

    I see my temper you’re disposed to try,
    Yet I may be lamented when I die;
    Speak as you please, you’re safe from my complaints,
    But you’re enough to vex a saint of saints.

    MR. A.

    My dear, you’re _waxing_ wroth.

    MRS. A. (_going_.)

                                    Provoking!

    MR. A.

                                              Stay,
    I hear our children’s voices at their play;
    I love to see them sporting on the rocks,

    MRS. A.

    Wetting their feet, and dirtying their frocks.
    My dear, come in.

    MR. A.

                      My darling, I’ll stay out.

    MRS. A.

    Don’t expect me to nurse you in the gout. [_Exit._




THE PILOT IN SIGHT.


    I.

    And are you sure the news is true?
    And is the pilot seen?
    I see the waters changed in hue,
    Old Neptune’s deck’d in green.

    II.

    ’Tis true; I see the glistening sail
    Far o’er the watery space,
    White as a floating bridal veil
    Thrown off a blushing face.

    III.

    All eyes are straining for the shore,
    I long to climb above,
    And shall I touch the land once more,
    And hear of those I love?

    IV.

    Before this wearying glass has spent
    Its sand, he’ll he aboard;
    I’ll ask not if we’ve pitch’d the tent,
    Or sheath’d the bloody sword;

    V.

    If Dost Mahomed captive pine,
    Or if the Tartar bend,
    I’ll trembling ask for one dear line
    From some familiar friend.

    VI.

    The pilot on the deck has sprung,
    He’s hail’d on every side,
    Shame on my false, rebellious tongue!
    Oh! why is speech denied?




THE ARRIVAL; OR, THE LAND-LUBBER’S SONG.


    I.

    The joys of the ocean let others discuss,
    A ship is to me a marine omnibus,
    Or an ark where man, beast, bird, and insect convene,
    And each living creature on board is unclean.

    II.

    Should slumber miraculous seal up your eyes,
    No chanticleer issues a summons to rise,
    You’ve the music of hounds, and should that fail to vex,
    It gives place to the sound of men swobbing the decks.

    III.

    In the stillness of night some fond fancies invade,
    Perchance you may dream that some fair, favour’d maid
    With delicate fingers is twining your hair,
    And you wake to find cockroaches, not fingers, there.

    IV.

    ’Tis a Babel of sounds; you’ve the lowing of cows,
    Sheep bleating, and squeaks of parturient sows,
    Geese cackling, ducks quacking, curs yelping, ne’er mute,
    And the wheeze of some plaintive, asthmatical flute.

    V.

    Around you what various odours arise!
    How blest is the man to whom nature denies
    The olfactory nerve, to whose nonchalant nose
    The stalest bilgewater is fragrant as rose!

    VI.

    To dine in the cuddy tames pleasures of sense,
    Proves life but a lottery; its prizes pretence,
    Its blanks dark realities, there ’twill be seen
    ’Twixt the cup and the lip what sad slips intervene.

    VII.

    You drink to a fair one: how blest her escape,
    Whose bosom’s not red with the juice of the grape;
    Each flagon may Tantalus serve for a stoup,
    And envious Neptune upsets your pea-soup.

    VIII.

    What pleasure to walk with a staggering gait,
    With dimness of sight, and confusion of pate;
    Like a drunkard to reel when the ship gives a lurch,
    And balance see-saw, like a duck forced to perch!

    IX.

    The city of palaces bursts on my sight!
    Its mosques and its temples I hail with delight;
    A palace in every building I see,
    For a pigsty ashore is a palace to me.


THE END.

LONDON: BRADBURY AND EVANS, PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HORÆ NAUSEÆ ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
